Hi, everybody. Welcome to the Data Science Hangout. If you're joining for the first time,
it's great to meet you. I'm Rachel. I'm the host of the hangout. If this is your first
hangout, what is it? This is an open space for the whole data science community to connect
and chat about some of the more human-centric questions around data science leadership,
questions you're facing, and what's going on in the world of data science. So we want
this to be a space where everybody can participate. And you can ask questions three different
kinds of ways. So you can jump in live and just raise your hand on zoom. And I can call
on you, you could put questions in the zoom chat. And feel free to just put a little star
next to your question if you want me to read it out. Maybe you're in a coffee shop or your
dog's barking or something. But we also have a Slido link where you can ask questions anonymously
too. And Tyler will put that in the chat right now. Just like to reiterate, though, that
we love to hear from everybody, no matter your level of experience or your area of work.
You will notice that we had a little bit of a last minute change of plans today. And I'm
so excited to be joined by Michael Chow, who is stepping in as our featured leader
today. So Michael is a software engineer at RStudio and previously led the data science
team at California Integrated Travel Project. And Michael, I'd love to just turn it over
to you and have you kind of introduce yourself and share a bit about the work you do.
Sure. Yeah. Thanks for having me. So I did a PhD in a different life, PhD in cognitive
psychology. And then I sort of flew the coop to industry where I worked on educational
tools and tools to measure data science skill. And then, yep, switched to working on building
out a data science team at California Integrated Travel Project. I'm really interested in sort
of, but I will say I love the tidyverse. I'm really interested in sort of like how people
can do analytics fast and what makes like really skillful data scientists and data science
teams. So I'm really excited to be here. Now I'm working at RStudio as an engineer. And
then as a kind of weird side thing, for the past years, I co-directed an org called Code
for Philly, which just tries to connect volunteers to nonprofits in Philadelphia to throw like
experts or like a hundred volunteers at really impactful projects in the city. So happy to
be here. Really excited to, you know, connect with people in data science and, you know,
discuss kind of all the weird parts of, of data science and data science teams.
Awesome. Thanks, Michael. While we're waiting for people to jump in with their own questions,
I'd love to kick it off by asking you, what's something that you're most excited about in
regards to data science and thinking about the year ahead?
Yeah, I feel like they're kind of like two, two things. One is, and this, this has really
been growing over time, but I think tools like dbt and the tools of like the modern
data stack to really build out a very nice warehouse quickly are just absolutely killer. I
think that the amount of ground a person can cover once they've kind of like wrangled these
tools is so great. I'd say on the other hand, I still like for the past decade, have felt so
excited about tools like dplyr in R and the tidyverse. And on the other side of like its
ability to let people query data freakishly fast. So I feel like dbt is kind of a new thing
I'm excited about. dplyr is the thing I've been like excited about for the last decade
somehow. And it's just stayed on like the top of my list.
Awesome. So I've been hearing about dbt a bit more, but I will admit, I don't really know
exactly what it means. Could you explain it a bit more?
Yeah, I would say so like, something I've seen before is like, imagine you're a person
building out like, so you've got all this data into a warehouse, it's just loaded up, it like
needs to be cleaned and made into like a data mart. So people can, like end users can consume
it. You're a person in charge of that, like, there was a point in time where it wasn't crazy
that that might just be a folder of SQL scripts, and then a weird some weird custom script to
somehow like chain them all together. And it just absolute chaos. So dbt, they're really
focused on analytics engineering, I shouldn't put that in air quotes as a legitimate thing.
But basically, how can you have a sane set? I would say like, Lucy, like, how can you have a
sane set of SQL scripts that very cleanly, like, orchestrate, like, all your cleaning in the
warehouse, you know, like the whole thing of like, I create a table, and then another table
depends on it, and another table depends on it. That's the like, high level part is this kind of
dependency graph. But also, they've really refined, I think the practice of warehousing and
like the the classic moves you'll need to do a lot of those have made it into dbt. So it's easy
just to stamp down kind of like a thing like they have snapshots. And that's I need to stop air
quoting things. But um, so that's like a move you can do now with dbt. And it's super handy.
Well, thank you. I know, just before people were jumping on, we were talking a little bit about
more about code for Philly too. And you told me a pretty awesome story about some of the work that
you did with that organization. Would you be able to share that example with us?
Like, yeah, so code for Philly. It's weird, because we spent a lot of time like talking to nonprofits
and learning about their problems. I would say the biggest problem we have is just connecting
volunteers with something that's impactful, like a lot of volunteers that used to come in, would
just have kind of random ideas they wanted to build, but they wouldn't be as focused on kind of
like, what a lot of nonprofits at Philly, we're hitting. But, but from time to time, we've been
able to really connect on great partnerships. So, so one was right at the beginning of the pandemic
last, I don't know how many years at the beginning of the pandemic, it's like March 2020. You know,
we're, we're like, deep in our apartments. And we connected with Penn Medicine, to create a COVID
monitoring dashboard. So actually a dashboard for capacity planning for hospitals. And, and that was
like such a stressful, but it helped helpful projects to like connect with this team, like data
science team that just wanted to put up a dashboard, and help them make it open source. And then
wrangle like all the people who came in. So Linode came in, and they provided resources. We started
getting like 300 people a week coming into our Slack, which was like 10%. That like we have 5,000
people. So our Slack started growing, and we had to like moderate. So it's a lot of just how do you
connect people with these things and help them grow? And really, it's like a lot of Slack channel
wrangling, and kind of like doc writing, but that so that that to me was like a nice Code
Freely project, we're able to just connect two groups of people, and then work on all the
communication and kind of like untangling that comes along with it.
Cool. Thank you. I saw Libby, you put a question into the chat if you want to jump in.
Sure. Yeah, I was wondering if you if you've ever had to defend your psychology background as being
data related. This is this happens to be a conversation that I was just having this past week
with a lot of my friends in the data space that are from psych, sociology, demography, like applied
demography, that have had to kind of defend their education as being quantitative. Just wondering if
you've ever hit that?
Yeah, that's it. Such a great question. I feel like, yeah, like my whole educational background is
tuned towards, I would say, like, psychology is the most important thing I think I bring, but
everything else is just like getting in the door to defend against that, like, like to bring in that
reality. So I doubled major in undergrad in psychology and statistics. And then I did a pretty
computational PhD in psychometrics. So that's sort of the methodological side of psychology.
But I, I say this, because actually, like that, yeah, a lot of engineers are happy with that. They're
like, math, that's great. But it's hard to explain. Actually, I think the most important parts I got
were the psychology parts, like research and design, and actually, like, being able to decompose weird,
hard problems and concepts. So yeah, I think it's a never ending battle to, to like elevate what
psychologists do. Like, I think every discussion about metrics is kind of a psychological
discussion. But yeah, I don't think I've gotten a lot of traction by saying like, I'm a psychologist,
I'm ready to help with your metrics problem. It's more been like, somehow going in the backdoor.
If that makes sense.
Yeah, one of my advisors in, in grad school always said, like, empaths, or empathetic people
always make the best data scientists, because you can kind of put different hats on to put yourself
in different shoes and being able to analyze all of that data. So I think, like having psychology or
having a different background, not only like, does it bring new questions, but you can also relate it
in different concepts, right? So it's super cool.
Yeah, yeah, I think totally. And it, I mean, I think the psychologist side also hits a lot of
really good product management type skills that I think psychologists are very good at, like
wrangling the high level problems, and like cohering a whole, like, set of problems into kind
of like a plan or coherent whole. So I do think like, I've like, there's a couple of data scientists,
like junior data scientists, I've been mentoring, and to me, they have like, really great psychology
skills, they're really good at breaking down the problems. And so I don't, I'm really hopeful for
psychologists as people who can make not necessarily great data science managers, but like, do that
weird data science work of like, lay the problems out and help things like move along beyond like,
coding things up.
I also think you guys get a lot more experimental design than people realize.
And it's so, so important. It's something that a lot of other people in other disciplines don't get.
And so it's something you guys can bring to the team. I know for my, my psych teammates,
that's something big they bring to the team. It's really, really wonderful. It's interesting that
people come up against that kind of barrier sometimes, because there should be more visibility
into it. You guys are so important.
I love this topic, too, of like the skills that we have that make us very successful
in what we do that might not necessarily be the skill that people think on paper,
would make you successful in it. I see Andy, you put a comment in the chat, too. Did you want to
jump in? Oh, just I, this is echoing really true for, for my grad experience. I have a master's
degree in system science. And so we, it's the basis of looking at things as systems of interacting
parts rather, and how you can look at the parts and the holes of things. And, and that's, you know,
a lot of systems thinking and systems theory. And, and it actually, that that program came out
of a psychology PhD program at Portland State University. And so I just did a lot of this
discussion is really ringing true for me. And I did an applied statistics alongside of it. And so
I got the experimental design and, and, and some of that. And that's really where I,
that was my entry to R and data science. And so I, but I entirely lean on that for
like the access to work in projects and stuff. And the system stuff is just like,
oh, you can do systems mapping. Awesome. You know, and it's like, well, you know, the way that we're,
we have mental models that, you know, that are very relevant in what we're studying here. And
so being able to, you know, talk about those and, and use those as well. Like, I think it's
really valuable, but it's funny how much I have to explain it sometimes.
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
Thanks, Andy. I see, Sam, you have your hand raised too, if you want to jump in.
Yeah, I think this is a really interesting topic and it's something that I've been
dealing, maybe struggling with is not as maybe too strong, but dealing with is sort of maybe
not strong enough at work recently, where some of these things that aren't like hard data science
skills that are more like soft skills are, I'm finding really undervalued where I'm at,
especially in like the technical teams of things. So I work on a team of data scientists and
software engineers, and I'm sort of wondering, like, I really think that soft skills are really
valuable and that's maybe my like private liberal arts undergraduate degree sort of coming through.
But, you know, how do you get more buy-in from, from people on like, basically getting them to,
to basically believe that soft skills are important and that it's important to spend time
on them as well as on like the hardcore, like data science, software engineering stuff.
Yeah, that's a great question. I'm curious, like, what kind of soft skill,
so you're thinking, or like what kind of problems you're thinking even for, like,
where the soft skills would really come to bear? Yeah, a lot of the stuff I'm thinking about and
that I've been struggling with is specifically when it comes to record keeping. So things like
taking minutes at meetings, making agendas for meetings, commenting your code,
documenting processes or workflows, things like that. Yeah, that's, that's a great question,
because I will say, like, the only, from my last job, the, the person I meet with regularly right
now is like a junior data scientist who, who's, like, standout skill was amongst other things,
like, standout skill was amongst other things, like record keeping. So, like, that, I think that's huge.
I wouldn't be surprised if, like,
in my view, like, a lot of those things almost, if you can, like, wrangle them into existence,
like, if you can make it happen, or just, like, they're a void and, and someone will fill it
eventually, or when it, like, with, once the note-taking happens, I think that
people really tend to rally behind it. So, but I'd be curious to, yeah, I, I'm really curious about
situations where it's, do you mean, like, the team, maybe, like, you have a team of data scientists,
and it's hard to, like, get people note-taking, or?
Yeah, so I'm, I'm by no means, like, a leader of a team of data scientists. I am
definitely, like, one of the people being led, and we sort of have, like, a hierarchy where there's,
like, a manager, and then there's a data science manager and a software engineering manager,
and then there's a few people floating around underneath, and I'm sort of floating around in
the data science area. And I've been, I've only been at this company for about a year and a half
right now, and I'm just finding myself really, like, I can't figure out, like, what processes
are, or, you know, what people are trying to do, or, you know, basically how to, how to communicate,
like, other stuff people are working, what they're working on, and sort of where they need help,
and if somebody needs to switch to a project, which happens quite a bit, getting context on
that project is really difficult, things like that. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's a, thanks, that's,
that's really helpful to hear. I think, like, if, yeah, teams, and there are, like, a few different,
it sounds like, pieces involved, like, some engineers, data science, their managers,
but maybe a lot of cross-cutting concerns. I think one of the most impactful things I saw was
there was this really great consultant I worked with last year named Kane Bacigalupi,
and they, they kind of blew my mind. They, they introduced 15 minutes daily stand-ups, and I,
prior to that, hated stand-ups, but, but the one thing they introduced that really
amazed me was they said, like, and it's just stand-up, it's, like, 15 minutes,
it has to end in 15 minutes, and you can't have, like, a product manager trying to work a backlog
in the meantime, and then I realized that every stand-up I didn't like was, did have a manager
trying to, like, update the status of different things, but to me, it's, like, game-changing to
just get people in a room for 15 minutes just to say what they did, like, that's the goal.
Everybody says what they're working on, and that, that, for me, has been really helpful for, like,
figuring out you have, like, this big stew of people sometimes hitting different things
that, if you hear what people are working on, oftentimes it's enough to figure out, like,
oh, who do I have to connect with afterwards, or, like, who should I, like, chat with?
I don't know if that's useful, but that really kind of, like, changed my work life,
because it's hard to get people to take notes or even to know where the notes will live
or that they'll be relevant. It seems like just getting people in a room
and not making that an adverse experience, like, just make it a very simple experience
sometimes really, like, cuts down this insane, like,
issue of, like, needing notes, but notes go out of date or often aren't just right, you know,
like, the right grain for us often. Yeah, that's a great question, Sam. I see there's a lot of people
that have some thoughts in the chat, too, and Caitlin, I was wondering if you want to jump in,
too. Sure, I hope you guys can hear me okay, because my Wi-Fi is not very good, but, yeah,
cool. So, yeah, I do that, too. So, I work on a team of, like, four-ish data scientists,
as well, and we're always kind of transferring code with each other, and I think even though
we're kind of working on the same thing, there's so many different ways to tackle the same problem,
and, like, there's so many, like, yeah, it's a really tough situation, but I think even just,
like, trying to interpret other people's code or what they're doing, what I found most helpful is,
honestly, just like Michael said, jumping on a call with someone and almost, like,
over-communicating, just to, because it's a win-win for everyone, like, you'll understand
the code and then be able to do, like, your job better, so I think it's never a bad thing to
over-communicate or just literally ask as many questions as possible.
We're learning that here, too. More communication is better. I see, Andy, you had some other
thoughts on it, too, if you want to jump in. Oh, just the sometimes changing the label of
what you're doing rather than, you know, saying that the soft skill is your coordination efforts,
um, using, like, project management language or something like that just gives people a little
more access to, like, seeing the value in what you're doing, um, and that's, I guess it was
just a comment, but, um, it sounds a lot like, um, the work is in, you know, in the spirit of,
like, continuity of operations, and so if, um, if sometimes it's just helping folks see where
the value is compared to what it is that they value, I don't know. Yeah, that's a great point,
too. I don't want to jump from this topic too quickly if there are other thoughts, too.
I was curious, Michael, what it's been like for you coming from a team, from leading a data science
team back into, um, like, more of an individual contributor role? Yeah, that's a great question.
Uh, well, I think RStudio is so, in my mind, the Tidyverse team is so great. I almost, like,
it, and I gave a talk last year at RStudioConf on porting, sorry, I have a window over here
with a fat bird outside, so it's like cat TV, um, but, um, yeah, uh, actually, I, I would say, like, um,
it's been really nice, and I think that, um, the challenge managing was, like, um, I was learning
a ton, basically, about, like, data engineering. I, I had, like, great people at all parts of the stack,
and so I was learning a lot about, like, data engineering and data science and analytics, um,
but not a lot of time to kind of develop or really take a lot of those ideas and put them
together in tools, um, so it's been really nice to be on the Tidyverse team, and, um,
now just, like, seeing people take a lot of insights and build tools out of them, um,
has been really nice, um, but, uh, yeah, so I would say the thing I miss from managing is, like,
really smart people telling me how wrong I am about a lot of things, um, what, what I really
like about the Tidyverse team is now there are these incredible people, like, trying to just take
these, like, insights and kind of, like, bottle them into tools so that everyone can kind of, like,
use them easily. I, I definitely won't miss all the meetings, though. Managing was a lot more,
uh, meetings, yeah.
Thanks, Michael, and, um, I get to ask you all these questions if people don't have other ones,
so, reminder, you can always just raise your hand, jump in, put it in the Zoom chat,
or you can use slide 02 to ask anonymously, um, but when you just said that, it was making me
think, um, when you said, like, a lot of people telling you how wrong something is or giving
feedback, like, when you were a manager, how did you handle those conversations and,
and, and creating an environment where people felt comfortable to do that? Yeah, I think, um,
I think one really helpful framing was, like, giving people an escape hatch for criticizing my
work, which was, like, hey, uh, so this is what exists now, and, like, it kind of, like, I had
this weird trade-off where I was, like, one person, but, uh, like, my goal was to help the organization
help the organization see how useful data science could be so we can bring you in to, like, make it
extra great, and I think that the framing of, like, so what I did was actually pretty bad,
and it was just to, like, get the vision out that we needed you, um, and now you're here, so, uh,
I think that's helpful because people could be, like, hey, I'm really glad that you, like, did
this work and, like, pushed out an insight. It, like, all needs to be fixed now, like, um,
especially, like, the data engineering, I do more, like, data science analytics, I think, um, so
they're able to be, like, I'm glad that this worked and, like, something came out, um, and now that
I'm here, like, we need to just rewrite it to be, like, robust, where robust is a code word for, like,
what you did was not super great and will probably break in, like, unforeseen ways, but I found that
helpful just to, like, actually for both of us to have that, like, hey, I, I, yeah, I did this,
it's probably bad, uh, I was really focused on pushing things out and, and I'm glad you're here
to, like, make it right. Awesome, thank you. Uh, Libby, I see you just raised your hand.
Yeah, I was gonna ask you, Michael, you brought up something that I've been talking with people
about this week as well, which is the structure of data science teams and how, um, some teams are,
like, just data scientists and they've got an IT team that will support them and implement models
and do the engineering side of things, and there are some teams out there that have data scientists
who are also data engineers, and then there are teams where there are both data engineers and
data scientists working together in tandem on things to make sure that stuff doesn't get stuck
in, like, a development pipeline and have to be refactored before deployment. Um, what are your
thoughts on structuring data science teams, including engineering or not? Yeah, that's,
it's like the, it's such a tricky problem, I think, and there are a lot of different
pitches on structures. I listened to, um, I know Jacqueline Nolas talked a bit about it on
a data science hangout, and she said, like, that she started believing that there were virtues to
different ones but ended up sort of sold on the decentralized model where data scientists
are embedded in teams. Um, I think I agree that, that data scientists and analysts should be
sitting with the teams that they're pushing out reports for. Um, it just,
I mean, otherwise I would be trying to send people into those teams to figure out what they want and
their priorities. Um, I think a good data scientist works with, like, a PM or whoever's leading the
team to, like, both, like, push up metrics but also kind of, like, help change the roadmap.
Um, I think it leaves the tricky question of, like, where should data engineers be,
um, and how should they interact with the teams. Um, it does, it seems okay that today, like, data
engineers, I think, are doing more, like, tooling empowerment, so I think they're a good team to
have, like, yeah, it's okay to have them a bit more centralized and, like, connecting to the
data scientists to, like, enforce best practices or enable, like, new pieces for them. I think that's
a nice model, like, data analysts, data scientists live in the teams and data engineers are kind of,
like, spokes of a wheel where then the data scientists connect with them and they work
closely to, like, enforce best practice and enable, like, new important things.
I'd be curious what people use, though. Sorry, now I have a cat just right here, so.
Tatsu, I see you had your hand raised. Was it on this topic?
Yeah, I think it's related to a lot of things, right? Um, I think, you know, largely what you're
saying, Michael, is kind of use your tools at your disposal, right? And I think that,
you know, people like Rachel and myself who aren't necessarily in a standard data scientific
sort of role, but, you know, we're all where we kind of interface with a lot of folks in
different functions in the company. And I think it's really important that, we've talked about
this before, but it's important to find your translators, right? And it's important to kind of
use the power of feedback. I know Rachel's a huge proponent of taking feedback and actually
making it into something actionable. But, like, really, like, you know, reach out to
those people, those people, right? Like, you know, Michael and I recently worked on something
together where we were trying to get some feedback based on something that he's working on. I feel
like, I think Michael's pretty amazing at actually putting things into action as well. But,
you know, I think that you have a lot of folks out there that are willing to help you do what
you need to, and you don't need to be so kind of, you know, focused just on what you're doing.
I think you'll find that if you're able to kind of get somebody from a different perspective that
can also kind of level with you, it's really a lot, a lot easier to, like, make something happen.
So I just kind of wanted to throw that out there. Definitely. Thanks, Tatsu. I see, George,
you have your hand raised to share some thoughts too. Yeah, I thought that was quite cool talking
about where the data scientists and where the data engineers go, because, so I deal with just
insurance companies, but I go from insurance company to insurance company, and they're non-life
companies, and I'm dealing with the actuaries mostly. And pretty much the model that I'm
trying to get more insurance companies to take in is because they've come from this really
traditional landscape where you've got lots of actuaries working on lots of Excel spreadsheets,
and it's getting to, it's been at the limit of that for years, but it's at the limit of that,
and there's a real lack of knowledge share and tool sharing, and that's where the data science
element comes in. But for me, within the organisation, you need to have this team
that's, I guess it's kind of like a mini-spoke, if you will, because they're central to the
actuarial team, which is a spoke of an insurance company, but within that team, I think, for this
speed of integration, especially sort of where it is now in the life cycle, I think you need a data
engineer, you need a couple of data scientists, they need to be kind of a jack of all trades
around sort of start to finish, but the most important thing is they need to be remote from
the IT team, and they need to be with the actuarial team. I think if it's too far removed,
and they're back with the IT team and stuff, you end up with the old problems, and they don't get
the business concept, and then you have a migration or something, and it doesn't work, and
it goes back to square one, but this time everyone's really livid about transformation and
bringing in data science, because they did it once already, it didn't work, and it cost x million
dollars, and they don't want to go again, so I think, yeah, so for me, within my teams, it's all about
getting enough skills so they can get stuff done, especially proof of concepts, and then if you need
to go back and sort of take stuff back at a step, then that's where you might look at
that centralized model again, but that's my thoughts on it and my experience.
I think that's spot on, that the more central it is, it's kind of a
diverge-converge thing, that a central team helps practice converge to what they see
as best practice, but in your case, if you're describing pushing out something new, or
getting something out that requires data engineering, that seems
important, that's like kind of diverging and going into exploring a new area, or a new lane of work,
just setting a data engineer there to allow it to actually do whatever it needs, versus
like do what a big body thinks is... Yeah, but if you want to bring it back, and
you're right, converge to the company-wide, make sure that everything's sort of on the
same platform, then it's important to bring it back again. Yeah, but I think it's spot on, just
making sure that that converging back kind of doesn't stifle creativity, or prevent a team
from doing the right thing, kind of, even if it breaks from what's happening now.
Manny, I saw you unmuted, do you have anything to add to that? I do, and I don't, I guess
I'm on the IT team right now, and I guess there are thoughts of like, okay, well,
you know, are we speaking the same language? Because I feel like being in data science, and it's such
a new field, so I'm in data science for real estate, it's kind of a new field, and it's new for the
company too, so it's almost like I can fit in anywhere, but nowhere at the same time, it's kind
of how I feel. So I guess there's like a sort of identity of where does data science fall,
it's kind of like, we know we need it, and so does it fall under IT, or does it fall
under a corporate operations, or, and it's interesting, because like the IT team is
fantastic, and they're, you know, they're very structured, and they're kind of like,
they've been in the business forever, and data science is so fluid, and so creative, and so kind
of like non-structured at the moment that, you know, you kind of have to look at where it
actually does fall, and I don't know that I have the answer for that, but I can agree with George,
and Michael, and everybody else that kind of chimed in, so a comment, I guess. I think we covered
everybody who wanted to chime in on this topic too, but a great discussion point, and I see
Caitlin, you had another question in the chat, would you want to jump in? Sure, so yeah, Michael,
I was just wondering if you've ever used data science within the psychology domain?
Yeah, I, so I worked on a skill assessment tool that, like an adaptive assessment,
which was sort of right in my wheelhouse in psychology, and so there we had a small team
of like an, me, an engineer, and some content creators, and we were just working on basically
a new product, but it was different in that the company hadn't focused on like psychology things,
and so the whole idea of like a test, and the psychology classics, like test reliability,
validity, were new to the company, and so that was an interesting one, where we both had to
prepare the data coming in to be quick to analyze, but also sort of like lay out the concepts
behind it, and kind of roll out like an adaptive testing thing. I think the most interesting thing
there that happened is I produced a lot of like long-form articles about it at the company, so
about like how does this thing work, you know, showing like it in practice in our data,
so there's this thing called the, so for one, like the cold start problem, that means
if you start rolling out a test, you don't have any data on it, but if it's an adaptive test,
you kind of need data to do the right thing, and so an adaptive test, it gets better over time,
you know, as you learn how hard the questions are, and things like that, so there I had to
write articles to the company about like what can we do in this case with a little bit of like
psychological theory. I will say I think the most interesting thing I took out of it, though, was
it was the opposite from psychological research, where I usually went like more complex. I would
like research, like usually dive deep into something. A lot of this case was about saying
like we could go deep, but we like shouldn't, like you might think that we should go really hard
into like reliability and do the exact right, like most rigorous measurement,
but we like shouldn't do that because we're building like a test product, and so actually
the scientific rigor is only like a piece of this kind of like emerging story. It would be really
bad if we had a very rigorous, we spent a lot of time on rigor, and nobody was taking the assessment,
so it's kind of like balancing that out, saying like I'm an expert at this thing. What you're
doing is fine. We can like shortcut in this thing. Yeah, I think that goes back to the
question people asked too about soft skills in psychology. Like I feel a lot of that was like
saying like hey, we could do the math, and we could roll out something very mathy, but actually
like soft skills, we should just focus on users and just patch in like the quickest,
most reasonable thing. Yeah, that's really cool. Thanks. Thanks. Thank you. Travis, I see you just
put a question into the chat if you want to jump in. Sure. That's a question I like to ask other
data science leaders. What you look for in data science resumes, cover letters, what your screening
process is like. It seems like every time we post something these days at our work, we get tons and
tons of resumes, and the screening process is hard because there are lots of really, really good
candidates out there. Do you have like a quick method? You know, like do you triage things?
I don't know. What are the flags you look for typically?
That's a good question. I feel like I'm always really interested in like can this person create
a slideshow? Like it's like Hugo Bowne, Anderson in his article like what data scientists do
according to like 35 data scientists, said something like yeah, like maybe the most
important skill is like making a slideshow. I think that's important is like can they communicate?
Do we think they could like sit with the team and actually like
understand its goals and work with the PM? But then as to how you screen for that, I have no
idea actually. I'm really stumped. That's like what I'd love to have insight into. I think it's
really hard to get at. The other thing is that I'm a strong believer that in fast, live, real-time
data analysis that not enough do we like have a data scientist just try to pull our data.
Like companies, data scientists and companies really vary in their ability to just
answer questions from data live. I think that's a really important skill for being
able to drive the ship and gain the trust of like a PM. And I think like a good example of this is
Dave Robinson is an R user, uses the Tidyverse and he feels comfortable enough
to just live analyze data for an hour a week on YouTube. I think that's so important
that a person can do that fast. It's like a communication skill basically. Like do you
have enough data science fluency to communicate with data like a conversation with a person?
And that's kind of why I started. So I maintain a port of dplyr to Python called Tsuba.
And that's a lot of why I started porting it is because I was working with really good
R users who could analyze data in real time and I just couldn't do it in Python.
So I think that's critical basically. How you measure it, I don't know. I think
there are a lot of ways you could do it with like realistic scenarios and tests.
I don't think people should be subjected to that kind of like pressure in an interview necessarily,
like you have like laser eyes on them and want them to analyze data. That would probably
like be a really stressful thing for a lot of people. But I think that skill somehow has to be
like sussed out and enter the picture. You could have a lot of, I should say you could have a lot
of good data scientists who can't do this and that's okay too. But I think there's, all orgs
need like these people basically. Yeah, those are great answers. Thanks.
I see there's a lot of great thoughts in the chat and I had a similar question to yours, Tatsu,
because I know like if something looks really nice, like the same way if a shiny app or data
visualization looks really nice, you might think it's better than something else. And Tatsu, you
asked a question about appearance if you want to jump in. I'm thinking like this is a case where
like reading the book by its cover actually does matter, right? Like in this specific case where
you're a data scientist, you have to be able to like take data, make it appear in a way that's
digestible to people, right? So I would almost think that it's true, but I don't know what you
think. Michael? Yeah, I think for like a designer, your resume is kind of a portfolio in a way
because you're a data scientist won't just be in a cave, they'll be actually interfacing with
people. So how they present this like initial, how they give you this initial
glimpse into who they are in a lot of ways is a very data science-y interaction. Yeah, I think
you're on to something. But I also realize people don't have a ton of time to make resumes, so
I can see the value of like presenting them with a problem, right, that lets them kind of like bring
that to bear. I like, yeah, I was going to say I like Travis's comment of like you can spot if
somebody's made their resume without a markdown. I think that's a good screener. For sure. I see,
Alice, you had a comment in the chat. Do you want to jump in?
If I can unmute, yeah. Hey. Hi. No, I think that I just wanted to like circle back on the idea of
like screening resumes is super challenging because you get basically, you have no idea why
somebody applied based on them sending you like a document they sent to like 100 other companies.
So I really like the idea of having people answer like one or two screening questions,
which actually gets at like the kind of key criteria that you have to meet in order to
which actually gets at like the kind of key criteria that you're looking for a job or forces
somebody to respond to like specifically what you're looking for and you get that kind of
customized like, okay, what I'm looking for is how curious is somebody really about this position?
How engaged are they? Are they really interested in working in this industry or did they get like
a LinkedIn saying like, hey, you should apply to this job? Because I've talked to candidates,
like I get on the phone with them and I'm like, hey, why did you apply to this job? And they
were like, oh, it came up on my LinkedIn. And I was like, oh my God, no, no, that's not what I need.
So I don't know if there are better platforms or ways to get people to like,
yeah, I love cover letters too. If somebody sends a cover letter, it's like an automatic
conversation with me. So yeah, if there are ways and platforms and things to get like,
you know, some sort of gauge on like more than just a resume, that's priceless.
Yeah, I think that's fair. It's a tough one.
I, yeah, I will say too, like one, one thing that worries me about using the resume is,
so like one, one weird fact about me is I, I did grad school at Princeton, but I, I'm a real
barbarian. I actually had no idea like what Princeton was before I went. My, my advisor
basically just pitched me there. And the only reason I bring this up is like, I didn't know
that grad students went to school for free at Princeton. And so when I like, first, I almost
didn't apply there because I legitimately believed they would charge me an incredible amount of
money. And two, when I was there, I was so freaked out because I, no one told me that it was free.
And so I was like sitting through the like interviews and like the, or like the visit,
like with this freaky problem, just hanging over me. And so I, I think with resumes and just jobs,
there's, there's that whole thing. It's like the less spooky we can be, like, actually like at the
point that a person submits a resume, we haven't even probably cued them to what we want. So like
that, that's why one hesitation of using the resume itself beyond maybe like a broad kind
of entry point is that as a company, it's probably our responsibility to really very clearly tell
people what we're like evaluating them on and just helping them appreciate actually what is being used
in the process. So that, I do think the resume is really, is a reflection of kind of data science
skill to a degree, but my, my one hesitation is that like, once we actually bring people into the
interview, that we have the chance to like tee them up on our expectations. And so I think everything
prior to that, I would kind of just, just in terms of like equity and where people come in from,
just, just in terms of like equity and where people come in from,
be careful to really like be super critical of.
Great point, Michael. I see, Libby, you had a great idea from your cover letter,
and a lot of people are commenting on it. So I'd love for you to share that, if that's okay.
Yeah, sure. I can talk about that. So last year, and I'm, to preface a statement, like I'm
a career switcher. So like, I'm in my mid to late 30s. And I was having to find an internship last
year. And finding an internship in your 30s is weird. It's hard. It's like, people see your
resume that's full of lots of experience and think like, why is this person applying for a resume or
applying for an internship. So I attended a talk that was led by Polly Mitchell-Guthrie
at Kinaxis, which is a Canadian company, supply chain analytics software company.
And I noticed that she happened to be hiring an intern in strategy. She's the VP of thought
leadership and industry outreach. I was like, how cool is that? That's amazing. My undergrad is very
supply chain oriented. So I reached out to her, asked her a little bit about the position, let
her know I was interested, and then applied. And in my cover letter, I added kind of in the place
of one of my paragraphs, you know, you have a few small paragraphs in a cover letter.
And at the end of my paragraphs, it was like, I feel really passionate about XYZ. And if you have
the time to watch this very quick two minute YouTube video, I think it'll explain why I'm
passionate about it. And had just a little link to my video. And I got the job. And that was
definitely what sealed the deal. Like everybody told me, I can't believe you made a video for your
cover letter. That's amazing. We've never seen that before. I had some like quick animations in
there that I did on my iPad. It was nothing fancy. And I actually recorded the video the day after I
got my COVID vaccine. So it's really sick. So it doesn't have to be perfect. It just has to be
real and authentic. And, you know, you and connected to like, I talked directly to her.
I was like, hi, Polly, how's it going? You know, in my video. I highly recommend that for anybody
who wants, you know, them to get across, but it wouldn't have worked if I hadn't had her email,
if I hadn't attended her talk, if I hadn't reached out to her and been an actual person.
I love that Libby. Thanks for sharing that with us.
Yeah, that's super cool.
I am also so nice. It's like, you can just open it on your phone and see.
Yeah, I don't think I'd recommend more than a minute or two minutes, right?
Show people you value their time.
Yeah, I'm scrolling through all of the, the cheers to you, Libby. And to find the other
questions. Let's see. Was there anything I missed earlier? Oh, I see Jackie, you just
asked a question. Do you want to jump in? Or I can read the question too. And if you want to add more
context, feel free to jump in. But it was what do you think of having an online portfolio or shiny
app?
You can do it. I mean, the more I think the more kind of like stuff people can see and interact
with the better if the codes on GitHub, it's super handy to have. I don't know if people will
read through it in detail. But even its existence is I think really a big indicator that I mean,
I mean, you've got like a portfolio of work that you were able to put up, which is probably what
you'll be doing a lot as a data scientist is like pushing up projects and stuff. So
definitely, I know Javier had talked about doing that before. I don't know if Javier is on.
But um, let's see, George. Oh, there you are. I just want to say Javier is definitely on.
Yeah, I this actually, you know, I don't think I got the current job I'm in right now because of
this. But I'm speaking to a team of people that had been surrounded by data their whole careers,
who weren't really that familiar with, you know, our as the programming language or some of the
capabilities of like shiny, I think, you know, I built a pretty lightweight shiny app, using the
BSLib framework, and thematic and a few other popular packages, and it kind of blew their mind.
And I think that's just, you know, the nature of them being surrounded by like, Excel dashboards,
or, you know, like kind of Tableau can make amazing things. But the Tableau dashboards
I usually see in production are just to kind of summarize data quickly, like they serve a very
useful function, but they're not really aesthetically pleasing, in my opinion. So
sharing kind of a real lightweight, you know, shiny app, went a long way. They told me afterwards,
they were like, that app went all over the company, we're so happy that you made that.
So I themed it as if it was their product. So I took like their logo and their color scheme,
and I made the whole shiny app look as if it was, you know, a bloom reach, like data product.
That's amazing. I was looking for the link that we had shared on a past hangout
when you shared that, but I'm not good at multitasking here. So
George, I see you had your hand raised too.
Yeah, I was just gonna say, I think that last point that you made there, Javier, on
putting it into their brand and their style, and it being on topic is the most important thing.
I think from my experience, it's really difficult to choose like just a general thing that shows you
can do data science. Most data scientists, I'd say, can see the sort of the broader aspect
of what you can do with data and stuff, but take it outside anyone there. And even though you've
done something really impressive with numbers, producing really good results, if it's not in
their domain, people are really bad, I think, at seeing the transferable skills. And that's
my biggest experience. So in terms of having demos, I think they're really good. And I wanted
to get some up on my website portfolio and that sort of thing. And I always sort of struggle to
choose the right one. Actually, I've just got to make a decision and get something up. But it's
that sort of thing as well. I think it's like if you're going for your dream job, you kind of
almost have to really fire it up and make it really specialized to that. Because in my experience,
if you go into an insurance company or a banking company or whatever with your favorite sport,
and you've taken all the data and you've brought it together and you've put out this really
kick-ass graphic, and then they just all look at it and go, yeah, but we do banking. You're like,
yeah, but it's just numbers. It's all just numbers. Can you not see it? I find it so
frustrating that people can't just see that you can just do all this with numbers and it's
transferable to every business and every company and every hobby in the world. Yeah, that's my thing.
That's an awesome point, George. I know an hour is going by extremely quickly. I see,
Brittany, you asked a great question in the chat a little bit earlier. Would you want to jump in?
Sure, I can jump in. So I think I've heard this question a lot around having some sort of
portfolio. And because I keep hearing it more and more often, I think I'd just love to ask the room,
do you think it's becoming one of those things that's more and more important that maybe people
should think about prioritizing time to create if they're looking in the job market? And if they are,
what kinds of things do you think that we should be including in that portfolio? Is it just
very simple data analysis? Is it maybe actually doing more of a shiny app? Is it more of an
actual model and like full out model building process? Like if someone wants to invest the time,
what do you think they should do to do that wisely?
Any thoughts, Michael or Larry? I see you have your hand raised.
Oh, cool. Yes, I'm on. All right. Sorry, I'm very passionate about this one.
With the projects, I've noticed that I'm not more, I'm more on the consulting side, but with the
projects, if I hire somebody to help me on a project, I'm looking at how they go through the
process. So I ask them if they have a project that they did to gather data. I ask them if they have a
project that they did to clean the data. Then I ask them the analyze, the visualization, maybe a slide
deck. And if they can walk through that whole process, then I can see they can do the whole
process from beginning to end gathering data. They can go find data sets, use them, apply them,
combine them, and then get insight out of them. That's the projects I look for, but I'm more on
the freelance side. So I don't know if that helps, but those are what I'm looking at.
Thanks, Larry. I like Tatsu's comment about having your name dot shinyapps.io as a signal.
So true. A lot of times, though, if I'm not hiring for a Shiny developer, that might not be relevant.
Something that does help a lot, though, is if they have a site, maybe through Netlify with GitHub,
something like that. Things like the new postcards package helps just make that possible. Even just a
one pager just shows that they care about kind of the content that they're sharing.
They care about kind of making R Markdown and other HTML documents,
things like that, talk to each other. It's really helpful to know.
Yeah, I think it's also such a great way to get feedback from people.
Yeah, I think portfolios are nice. One, it's like a victory lap. You get to show off all your hard
work. So I think that's super nice. I think two is applying for jobs. I think applying for jobs,
it's so nice to find other people who are also looking for data science jobs or working as data
scientists. And then a portfolio. I would say the nice thing is even versus sending it to a company
you're applying to, being able to connect with people and show your work to them and talk about
it and work on stuff. I think that's also a really exciting piece. Yeah, I think the portfolio is huge.
Brittany, was part of the question about knowing what the project should be that you work on for
them too? Yeah, I think Larry gave some insight and a couple others did too, but just it sounds
like it's a little more of what we might consider the basics and not so like super fancy, crazy
modeling types of things. Yeah, I would start like just by even boxing your time and deciding
how long you want to spend on it and then work backwards. Because the biggest risk is that
the projects never happen. And I know this is true for me. I just want to end up creating the
perfect project, but if I block my time to one day, then at least you can just get something
out. And then I think it also really sharpens thinking around how much is good enough.
I know Tori just dropped, but she had a great comment in the chat too. And I think this is an
awesome like other side effect of it, but it's like if you are creating that shiny app or like
Libby did with the YouTube video and they're sharing it around the company, that's also
amazing for building relationships across the company even before you start.
And then recognizing who you are. It's really cool.
I see Javier, you have a question. I know we're a minute over and just want to make sure Michael,
you have a few other minutes. Yeah. Should I? Oh, no. I just see Javier put it in if you want
to read it. Sure. Yeah. The question is just like, how are you staffed? How does RStudio staff you
on to new projects? Like are you working on multiple problems at the same time? Or is it
more like, you know, you're personally very curious about some aspect of the Tidyverse that
you want to kind of dive deeper and try to improve? Or like, how does that kind of staffing model work
at RStudio? Yeah. So I'm probably not the best person as I've been here for like a couple,
a few months. But I think, I mean, the Tidyverse team is just so great and
self-motivated. I mean, I think everyone on the team is sort of like a fanatic in a way,
like they have a problem that they really want to solve. They're very much like,
they remind me a lot of researchers. And so really, I think a lot of it seems to fall out
pretty naturally that it's pretty weird for people to have like this kind of focus, like
Thomas on ggplot2. Like you're just not going to see that level of dedication, I think,
a lot. And so I think that like the hard part is kind of done, I think, with a lot of people on
the team. It's like people with weird obsessions. So I have to say, like, I don't know why I've just
been dedicated to porting tools to Python for the past three years. Like I use Python for
a lot, but wish I was using the Tidyverse. And so it's like with that, just knowing that I've
been weirdly been working on this for three years, it like falls out pretty naturally,
like figuring out what's a good thing to work on. And so I'm working with Julia Silgay right now.
And to her credit, she's like incredibly great and, you know, like flexible and interested in
finding the right thing. So I think it's a lot about maybe people chasing their weird,
very specific R Python related obsessions, if that makes sense. It's a great team. It seems
very autonomous. And I would say kind of weird in its focus that people have very specific,
incredible focuses. Thanks, Michael. Thank you. Michael, before we go, I want to ask you
about some of the things that you're working on and things we should be keeping an eye on
or checking out as well. Yeah, that's a great question. I should have brought this up
early. So I'm working with Julia Silgay and Isabel Zimmerman on ModelOps. So this is like,
how can we make it really easy to go from a trained model to something you're able to serve
so people can actually interact with or a service can use it, say, on a platform?
And so that's been really exciting to see. A lot of the Tidy Models is focused on making it easy
to train models and do all that. And then that last step or mile, which is getting it off your
computer onto somewhere else and running as, say, like a web application. So I've been really
excited about that. And then I would say just working on Python tools in general, I've been
really excited to almost like, I love the insights that people in the Tidyverse have. So to almost
think about what's some of the magic that they've captured that we can bring into Python
to make data science a delight. And the one thing I'll say there is data science tools
in Python are really interesting because I think, in general, the engineering tools in Python are
incredible. So a lot of the pieces people in the Tidyverse had to build out, the foundational
pieces are there. I think it's just the Tidyverse API and the high-level flow would bring so much. So
yeah, super excited to work on that type of stuff.
That's great. Thank you so much, Michael. I see Tatsu was sharing a few links
in the chat for us to check out as well. But thank you all so much for joining today and for
all the great questions too. Hopefully see you all back next week as well. But Michael,
a huge thank you to you for filling in here last minute as well. Really appreciate you
sharing your experience with us too. We haven't got a chance to talk at our studio too.
No, thanks for the opportunity. I think it's super great having a bunch of people
in a room just talking about the weird corners of data science.
It's awesome. Thank you so much, Michael. Have a great rest of the day, everybody.
Bye.